The 6th, and we're at 713 East 30th Street in the
beautiful home. Paul Van Ryper and Paul, say a
sentence and let's check. This is the old Cabot
House, which is on the National Register of
Historic Places. It's the oldest house of any size
in the county. Okay, now... Paul, to introduce
yourself to someone who may hear this tape or read
the transcript many years from now, describe your
background, where you grew up, where you went to
college, and experience before you came to A&M.
Okay, I was born in Indiana in La Porte. My father
was school superintendent, which is a background
I don't wish on people often. He was school
superintendent my entire high school period. He
was commissioned in World War I, and I never lived
in the ports but a few months. He
was commissioned to give, as a captain in what's
called the sanitary corps, to give training to
shell-shocked and insane soldiers,
rehabilitation work in veteran's hospitals in
New Jersey and Virginia then he came back to
Indiana
and became superintendent at Franklin Indiana
and then Lebanon Indiana where I grew up he was
superintendent there from 1922 to 1942 and I view
Lebanon Indiana as my hometown and as a native
Hoosier
I went to high school in Lebanon,
was lucky enough to be valedictorian, and got a
full scholarship ride to DePaul. My father and
uncle, who had gone to Franklin College, Indiana,
did not like DePaul because of some football
experiences. And my uncle, who was a corporation
lawyer in Chicago, offered to pay the difference
between what it would cost me to go to DePaul and
anywhere else. He was definitely favoring
Harley, which at that time I could have got in.
Everybody was looking for students.
This is 1934, the middle of the Depression.
Well, that, of course, committed me to DePaul. So,
I went to DePauw. I thought it was just about the
right size. I had come from a high school which had a
graduating class of 79, and I wasn't prepared for a
big institution. I thoroughly enjoyed DePauw. I
graduated as Phi Beta Kappa, major in history.
I would have majored in political science, but
didn't much care for the political science
professors, so I had a minor in social studies. I
applied then. I got interested in the University
of Chicago. This is the heyday of Hutchins. The
second. How big was DePaul? DePaul was about 1,200
then. It's now something like 2,200 there about.
It had been in the 20s up to about 1,500.
So I got a half scholarship to Chicago and decided I
was going to proceed and major in political
science, which interested me. I might just as well
have gone to graduate work. There was 20%
unemployment at that time.
In addition, the major source of employment was
the public service, which was expanding rapidly,
as you know. What year was that? I enter
DePauw in 34, graduate 38. I enter Chicago the fall
of 38. And I finish my doctor prelims. the summer of
41.
I'm working on my doctoral dissertation, and
December 7 occurs. I have a very high draft number,
8,500 or something like that, so I'm in no danger of
being drafted immediately. But I, in 1939,
applied for a reserve commission in the Army. It
looked like things were coming to a head, so it
didn't take
great brains to figure that out. Well, the
Quartermaster Corps was the only part of the Army I
could get a commission in without having prior
military service. So I often laughed at my
background. My background for commission was the
10 series of correspondence courses. including
truck driving by correspondence, if you can
imagine. At the University of Chicago, they did
weekend military training for civilians. And
they did a series of six weekends. I took that.
Chicago also had a rifle range. And I qualified for
an expert bad small bore. They didn't have caliber
30. And on July 2, 1942, I was called up as a second
lieutenant and sent to Fort Lee, Virginia. Let's
back up just a second. How, where, under what
circumstances did you hear about the happenings
on December 7 in Pearl Harbor? Oh, I was living in a
dormitory room on the campus. right across from
the place where the atom bomb was begun. And at that
time we were mad as hell because our squash courts
had gone for reasons unknown. Did anybody, did you
students know what was going on underneath the
stadium? No, except classified. uh information
and nobody was talking were there any graduate
students that you all knew that were working on
that project not that we were aware of so uh excuse
me go ahead quite secretively uh as i say we were all
furious because our best squash courts went and i
played squash a great deal then My major professor
at Chicago was Leonard White, who's considered
the kind of founder of modern public
administration. He did the first textbook in
1926. He had just come back from three years as U.S.
civil service commissioner.
Probably I pointed to that at the suggestion of
Charles Merriam, who was head of political
science at Chicago for years and who was a personal
friend of FDR's.
Interesting backgrounds there.
White encouraged me to get a commission. So I was
called up before my doctoral dissertation was
done. It was just as well I wasn't getting anywhere
with it at that time and my mind was not. Now you had
changed to political science. Yeah. How did that
change come about? Well I had started in to be
political science at DePaul but I didn't care for
the faculty and I liked history anyways so I
combined the two and my dissertation was the
History of the United States Civil Service, which
later I parlayed into a book, which was published
finally in 1958. My dissertation, 1900 to 1940, I
parlayed it back to 1789 and forward to the date of
publication, 1958.
I went in the military. I don't know how much you
want a little bit, because it is relevant.
I was sent to Fort Lee, Virginia, reported in, and I
was assigned within a week to the 9th
Quartermaster Training Regiment, which was
black troops. Fort Lee had two black regiments and
five white, plus the Quartermaster School. And I
served for let's see, about 18 months as an officer
in an all-black outfit except white officers,
black negro that is, non-coms and enlisted men.
Let's venture on that just a second. What kind of
nomenclature, what What identifying words were
used then by serious professionals like you to
identify those men? At that time, we spoke about
colored troops. And they accepted that? Yes,
there was no... And basically, where were they
from geographically? Primarily from the South.
We had some from New York. who were not accustomed
to going to the back of the bus. And there would be,
periodically. This is Virginia. Virginia. Near
Petersburg, Virginia, just outside. And you were
a newcomer to the South. To the South. But I seemed
to get on. So there was a tendency, if you got on with
black troops, to keep you there. Well, I'd been
there about 18 months, and I knew I was going to be,
the officers were turning over and being sent to
Europe. I had an interesting situation, very
briefly. When I tell the Corps of Cadet students
the promotion possibilities in wartime, I was a
second lieutenant three months, a first
lieutenant nine months and when I had to be a
captain for over two years before major I thought
that was a long time.
And so I was a captain by the time the end of the 18
months and our colonel had been the personnel
director of
I think one of the large meatpacking firms,
anyway. He was W.W. Watson. And I went to him and
said, if I go overseas, could you put me with a white
unit for a change? He said, I'll try. Said, you've
done very well for me. And so I went in April 44 with
the 63rd Quartermaster Base Depot headquarters
and headquarters company. it was 36 officers and
118 enlisted men the top cadre for a quartermaster
based depot when you had enough land to put one on
and I was designated the purchasing and
contracting officer and when the colonel said why
that he said well I've I don't have any person in
contracting officer you've had some enough
education you ought to be able to learn it so I said
all right this suits me and
we were formed from people who already had their
background for example we had the captain who was
in charge of Cole had been the owner of a coal yard,
this kind of background. It wasn't a military
outfit, except our commanding officer was
West Point,
Colonel Harding. serial number 4204, which
indicates his.
So, yeah, we had four full colonels in the outfit.
It was an outfit to run a large operation. Well, we
set sail for England on June 19th on a French luxury
liner that had been pulled out of Brest Harbor. to
keep the Germans from getting it and then refitted
for a troop ship and we sailed alone because we were
faster than viewed as faster than the submarine so
we got across to Liverpool without incident and
spent a couple of weeks at the Seaforth barracks in
Liverpool and then went for some depot training
experience, sort of, to a
general depot, the quartermaster part of it, in
Burton-on-Trent.
And they were losing their officers, so I became
the S-3, the mansion training officer, for that
for a couple of weeks, or three weeks. And then
Prings were moving fast on the continent and on
early, let's see, about August 9 or 10, we got on a
train for Southampton. A day later, we went across
to land on Normandy. Thank God it was in August, not
in June.
And we landed at, I never can remember whether Utah
or Omaha, landed on Utah Beach, I think. One or the
other, I'll have to look it up.
Without any problem.
We went over on a Belgian freighter,
Leopoldville, which a month later was sunk in the
channel. But there were, we went across and we all
wore gas masks. the Germans have not broken
through at St. Louis yet so we can hear the guns and
so on although the US has air superiority there are
no danger there's a flyover plane occasionally
Midnight Charlie we called him who was obviously
just kind of nobody fired at him let him look
figured this would be discouraging enough to see
how strength there was
Well, we'd been there a few days when Patton broke
through. And an interesting experience, which
is, as far as I know, has not been written up. I
thought I would do it sometime, and time's getting
short, so I'll either do it for three days. we
realized finally the beach command and we were as
quartermaster we were helping assisting the
beach command half at Utah and half at Omaha and I'm
sorry and a few more back in Cherbourg the only full
depot was at Cherbourg at that point it's the only
place we had enough land to award quartermaster
depot so for three days Patton commandeered all
the trucks from the beach that had been bringing
supplies and loaded them with gasoline and
supplies and he took off with all the beach trucks
or nearly all of them and
the way things were logistically on the beach is at
any one time there are anywhere from 200 to 400
ships out there in the English Channel and the what
we called ducts ductworks holding a ton and a half I
guess about that I'd have to check that come up and
the nets would put two net loads in a duct and it
would come back on land the nets would be unloaded
in piles they would be put on trucks and the trucks
went to the interior depot. No trucks. The piles on
the beach are getting to astronomical pyramidal
proportions and the beach command doesn't know
what to do and the problem is solved by one of our
officers, Major Schaffner, who in Private Life
was a photographer in Indianapolis, Dale
Shockner. He said, look, can these ducks make it up
the beach road?
If they can, we lay out a depot right above
and unload and sort there. And we don't have to use
trucks to get the stuff off the beach. and whatever
trucks can then come in to the upper part and be
loaded. And sure enough, it worked.
I was assigned with a sergeant to go up and lay out
the stakes for the long runways that you send stuff
down a roller conveyor and it's sorted out and all
the beans here and all the potatoes there and all
something else there and it had been mine
presumably all the mines had been I discovered
later that not all of them had done we I saw down at
one field a mine exploded and knocked the track off
a Caterpillar. But nevertheless, we went out and
laid out and staked the thing, and this worked and
worked fine. So I give Schaffner credit for that
problem. I'll back up once further, because this
hit us in Paris. Then we were wondering, where we
were going to be sent. They're now land for more.
And we were supposed to be sent to Metz.
Well, it turns out that the group who were to go to
Paris, who were much senior to us, General Rogers
could not stand the colonel commanding the unit
that was scheduled for Paris, and he sent them to
Metz. and we got the Paris assignment. We were the
youngest depot unit in the UK and we got the choice
assignment by that accident. So we head for Paris
on September 10th and set up the Quartermaster
Depot in a French warehousing concern, 105
Rue d'Aubervilliers in
Oh, the working class suburb just north of Paris.
Well, be that as it may. And
in three weeks' time, we are supplying food,
clothing, and gasoline to four field armies. This
is where the Army military preplanned
organizational system does things that private
enterprise couldn't have done from scratch in six
months.
Within six weeks, we were from our little
headquarters unit, we had 1,500 US military,
about 2,000 French civilians and a battery of
German PWs operating as an entity. We had one
problem. We'd been there about three weeks when
suddenly in the Paris rail cars, rail yards,
there's no railroad around the coast. Everything
comes into Paris and then has to go out from there.
That's why we were so central to four field armies
for about three months.
Somebody sent 700 rail cars to us and 250 trucks all
at once. We have 26 warehouses that can unload at
any one time two cars or three trucks.
Well, Quartermaster General sent down
inspectors to find out what was going on and we were
exonerated as all we did was to begin to unload
things in between the tracks. and unloaded them in
the streets and it was the suburbs of Reveille.
Things in the streets. And as our colonel told the
inspecting officer, do you want trucks unloaded
or pretty warehousing? You can't have both right
now. So the person who had done this was nothing
less than Colonel Florsheim. What's his name?
Florsheim. Florsheim Shoes. As in, oh, OK. The
boss man of Florsheim Shoes who had done this to us.
And he got reamed, I'm sure. Well. Here's what
happened to the best laid supply plans.
The ships that left New York were loaded
carefully.
What would have been easiest was to put all the
beans in one ship and all the peas in another ship,
but if you lost a ship, you lost the beans for the
entire continent. So every ship had six or eight
items. Now, here's what happened, you see.
They're in a hurry on the beach. They put the nets
into the hull. Here are the six and eight items
around the nets. They're tossed in, and the nets
are mixed. They are dumped on the beach. They are
then sorted
up on the beach. They're re-sorted. OK. So the
trucks bring them in to the depot. And the 700
trucks have to be, and the rail cars, all have to be
dumped. and all resorted again. So there's no
simple way to solve this, and our records were an
absolute mess because we started the death pool
without
a full set of documentation files.
We have things being tallied in by American
soldiers, German PWs, French civilians, and what
the hell they're tallying them in for, God only
knows what the records show. I later became
director of the supply division. First, I was
moved from person and contracting officer to
commanding officer of the depot supply company,
which provided most of the warehousing. And I
became major and director of the supply division,
which was
the things that are
like civilian stuff, office supplies, paint, et
cetera, and so on, plus food. I figured I had my
records were good plus or minus fifty percent on
any given item. It took me about a year to
re-warehouse the whole place.
Okay, as purchasing and contracting officer I
wound up in charge of the produce for the American
troops in the Paris area and for about a year I was
buying price produce for approximately a quarter
of a million men. It's an occupation I want nothing
more to do with. You can lose your shirt. And I'm
chuckling to myself. I can't imagine anything in
your background prepared you for this. Nothing
whatever, except a certain amount of
flexibility. I hired three Frenchmen. We dealt
with the Paris market through the French Ministry
of Foods. The arrangements were interesting
because we bought things on reverse land lease.
The French government paid for whatever we
bought. And we had a consignment in the Paris
market of produce. France was quite
self-sufficient in produce, in food of all kinds.
The only things in short supply then were meat,
butter, and eggs because Normandy was shot up.
That was the meat, butter, and egg country. So I
dealt with the Paris market and made friends. I had
three assistants whom I kept in touch with for many
years. One is still living. I just got a letter from
him. I wanted Frenchmen who were without any
possible taint of collaboration. So I hired
William Duncan, who was the son of a Canadian
soldier and a Frenchwoman in World War I. He'd
lived in Canada for part of his life and had been in
the resistance and
he was totally bilingual, which was very helpful.
And I hired Norman Pullen, who was the son of the
British headmaster of the British school in Paris
who'd been interned the entire war in Paris. And
the third was Joseph Kertetz, a Hungarian Jew,
whom I'm still friends with, who had managed to
save both himself and his parents in Vichy,
France.
We gradually closed out the depot and I left in
April 1946, came back and was discharged,
remained in the reserve, and became a lieutenant
colonel after a while. In Ithaca
I was asked if I wanted to be executive officer of an
infantry regiment and I thought Why the hell are
you asking a quartermaster to be in charge of
infantry? Well, I had in between 55 and 60 gone and
done the command general staff course in
Leavenworth and the reserve version. He said,
you're the only one around who's done that. I said,
give me a day or two to think about it, but I declined
it. It was too much time. So my military career was
in effect. I was in a reserve unit, a logistical
unit, and enough to end up with a 15% military
pension, which is useful. But the experience
was... important I think in terms of my main field.